What is DSA?
DSA is defined as a combination of two separate yet interrelated topics – Data Structure and Algorithms. DSA is one of the most important skills that every computer science student must-have. It is often seen that people with good knowledge of these technologies are better programmers than others and thus, crack the interviews of almost every tech giant.

DSA Full Form
The term DSA stands for Data Structures and Algorithms, in the context of Computer Science.


Introduction to Data Structures and Algorithms (DSA)

Topics

What is Data Structure?
What are Algorithms?
How to learn Data Structures and Algorithms (DSA) from scratch
Learn about Complexities
Learn Data Structure
Array
String
Linked List
Matrix/Grid
Stack
Queue
Heap
Hash
Tree Data Structures
Binary Tree
Binary Search Tree
Other Tree Data Structures
Graph Data Structure
Learn Algorithms
Searching Algorithm
Sorting Algorithm
Divide and Conquer Algorithm
Greedy Mehtodology
Recursion
Backtracking Algorithm
Dynamic Programming
Pattern Searching
Mathematical Algorithms
Geometric Algorithms
Bitwise Algorithms
Randomized Algorithms
Branch and Bound Algorithm
Practice problems on DSA
   

What is Data Structure?
A data structure is defined as a particular way of storing and organizing data in our devices to use the data efficiently and effectively. The main idea behind using data structures is to minimize the time and space complexities. An efficient data structure takes minimum memory space and requires minimum time to execute the data.

What is Algorithm?
Algorithm is defined as a process or set of well-defined instructions that are typically used to solve a particular group of problems or perform a specific type of calculation. To explain in simpler terms, it is a set of operations performed in a step-by-step manner to execute a task.

How to start learning DSA?
The first and foremost thing is dividing the total procedure into little pieces which need to be done sequentially.

The complete process to learn DSA from scratch can be broken into 4 parts:

Learn about Time and Space complexities
Learn the basics of individual Data Structures
Learn the basics of Algorithms
Practice Problems on DSA
